What Is a Link?

A link is a pointer or reference to another file or directory on the filesystem. 
It doesn’t copy the data but simply points to the data blocks of the original file.

There are two types of links:

Hard Link

Soft Link (Symbolic Link)

How Links Work Internally

Every file in Linux has an inode number, which stores metadata and points to the file’s data blocks.

Hard links point to the same inode as the original.

Soft links point to the filename path, not the inode.

1. Hard Links

A hard link is an exact mirror of the original file. 
It points directly to the inode (the data structure storing file content info) of a file.

It points directly to the inode of the original file. 
In Linux, an inode is a structure that stores information about a file like its size, 
permissions, and location of the data on disk.

Key Points:

A hard link is identical to the original file because they both point to the same inode, 
making them equal without any distinction between “master” or “copy.”

If you delete the original file, the data is still safe and accessible using the hard link.

Hard links cannot be created for directories.

You can create multiple hard links to the same file, and all will reflect the same content.

Works only within the same filesystem.

Step1: How to Create hardlink:
ln original.txt hardlink.txt

Now we’ll create a hard link—imagine this as giving the file another name that points to the same content.

This command doesn’t copy the file. It just creates another reference (or name) that points to the same data on disk.

Step 2: Check the inode numbers. ls -lrthi

In Linux, files are actually stored as inodes (index nodes). Both the original and the hard link point to the same inode.

Notice how both have the same inode number, This means they both point to the same location on the disk.

Step 3: Display the content of both files

Display the content of both files: originalfile.txt and hardlink.txt.

Both show the same content, because they’re really the same file with two different names.

Step: 4 Add New Content and Verify Data Sync

Now, let’s add a new line to the file using the echo command:

echo "this is project1" >> originalfile.txt

This command appends the text "this is project1" to the end of originalfile.txt without affecting the existing content.

Next, check the contents of both files:

Notice: You’ll see the same data in both files, including the newly added line.

As you can see, the data is synchronized between originalfile.txt and hardlink.txt.

Step 5: Delete the original file

Now let’s delete the original file:

You might think the data is gone, right? Let’s check the hard link:

Yes, it’s still there! The data is safe because the hard link (hardlink.txt) still points to the same inode. 
The actual file content is not deleted until all hard links to that inode are removed.



2. Soft Links (Symbolic Links or Symlinks)

A soft link is like a shortcut. It stores the path to the original file and points to it.

Key Points

Symlinks have a different inode.

They can link to directories.

If the original file is deleted, the symlink becomes a dangling (broken) link.

Step1: How to Create hardlink:
ln -s original.txt softlink.txt

This creates softlink.txt as a shortcut to original.txt. It doesn’t copy the file, just points to it.

Step 2: Check the inode numbers. ls -lrthi

The inode numbers are different because the soft link is a separate file pointing to the original. 
This means softlink.txt is a symbolic link pointing to originalfile.txt.

The arrow (->) shows that softlink.txt is a symbolic link pointing to originalfile.txt.

Note that the inode numbers are different because the soft link is a separate file pointing to the original.

Step 3: Display the content of both files

Display the content of both files: originalfile.txt and softlink.txt.

You’ll see the same content from both files.

Why? Because softlink.txt is just a shortcut pointing to originalfile.txt. 
They show the same content since you’re accessing the same file through different names.

Step: 4 Add New Content and Verify Data Sync

Now, let’s add a new line to the file using the echo command:

echo "this is project 2" >> originalfile.txt

This command appends the text "this is project 2" to the end of originalfile.txt without affecting the existing content.

Next, check the contents of both files:

Both files show the same updated content.

This confirms that the data is synced. Even when you view it through softlink.txt, it still reads from originalfile.txt.

A soft link always points to the original file’s path, so any changes in the original are immediately reflected through the link.

Step 5 : Delete the original file

Now, let’s delete the original file. You might think the soft link will still work, but let’s find out:

You will see output like: No such file or directory. Why? Because softlink.txt was just a pointer to originalfile.txt.

Once the original file is deleted, the soft link becomes broken it has no content to point to. 
This is the key difference from a hard link, which still works even if the original is deleted.


Hard Link vs Soft Link
Feature   	                   Hard Link	            Soft Link (Symbolic)
Inode Number	                 Same as original	      Different from original
File Deletion Impact	         Still accessible	      Link breaks if original is deleted
Works With	                   Files only	            Files and directories
Data Synchronization	         Yes	                  Yes
Cross-filesystem Linking	     No	                    Yes
Identified With ls -l	         Regular file	           Starts with 'l'


Use Cases
Create multiple names for one file without duplicating data.
Maintain backup references.
Organize directory access using symbolic links.
Shortcuts to config files or frequently accessed paths.





3. tr Command (Translate Characters)

tr is used to translate, replace, or delete characters from standard input (not directly from a file).

Common Syntax
tr [SET1] [SET2]

It reads from stdin

So you combine it with commands like cat, echo, or pipelines ( | )

Example 1: Convert lowercase to uppercase
cat names.txt | tr [a-z] [A-Z]
Example 2: Remove all digits from input
cat sample.txt | tr -d [0-9]

The command tr -d [0-9] tells the system to delete all digits from the file content.

Example 3: Append Uppercase Conversion to a file
cat names.txt | tr [a-z] [A-Z] >> capital.txt

This reads content from names.txt, converts all lowercase letters to uppercase, and appends the result to capital.txt.







4. sed — Stream Editor for Parsing and Transforming Files

sed reads a file line-by-line and allows you to replace, delete, or print specific parts of text without opening the file manually.

Basic Structure

Example1: Replaces the first occurrence of “unix” with “linux” in each line.
sed 's/unix/linux/' sample.txt
It will replace the first occurrence of "unix" with "linux" in each line of sample.txt.
s/ → Stands for substitute
unix → The text you want to replace
linux → The new text that will replace the old text
/ → Separates components of the command
sample.txt → The file in which replacements will be made

Example2: Replaces the second occurrence of “unix” with “linux” per line.
If the word unix appears only once on a line, nothing changes.
If unix appears two or more times, only the second one gets changed to linux.
sed 's/unix/linux/2' sample.txt
s/ → Stands for substitute.
unix → The text to find.
linux → The replacement text.
/2 → Targets the second occurrence of unix in each line.

Example 3: Replaces all occurrences of “unix” with “linux” in every line.
With the help of the g (global) flag in sed, you can replace all occurrences of a word in each line not just the first one.
sed 's/unix/linux/g' sample.txt
s/ → Stands for substitute.
unix → The word to find.
linux → The replacement word.
/g → Globally replaces all occurrences of unix
Line-Specific Substitution

Example 4: Replaces “unix” with “linux” only on line 3.
3 → Targets line 3 specifically.
s/unix/linux/ → Replaces “unix” with “linux”, but only the first occurrence on that line.
sed '3 s/unix/linux/' sample.txt
Command With g
/g → Ensures all occurrences of “unix” within the specified lines are replaced, not just the first match in each line. 
Here, line 3 is changed, with both instances of “unix” replaced by “linux.”
sed '3 s/unix/linux/g' sample.txt

Example 5: Replaces “unix” with “linux” on lines 1 to 3.
sed '1,3 s/unix/linux/g' sample.txt
1,3 → Applies the substitution only to lines 1 through 3.
s/unix/linux/ → Replaces “unix” with “linux”.
/g → Ensures all occurrences of “unix” within the specified lines are replaced, not just the first match in each line.


Print Control

Example 6: Replaces “am” with “was” on line 2 and prints the line twice.
sed '2 s/am/was/p' sample.txt
2 → Applies the substitution only to line 2.
s/am/was/ → Replaces “am” with “was”.
p → Print the line if a substitution happened
It looks at line 2.
If it finds "am", it replaces it with "was".
Since you didn’t use the -n (no-print) option, sed prints the entire file by default.
The p flag also prints the modified line again — so you’ll see that line twice.

Example 7: Replaces “am” with “was” and prints only the modified lines.
sed -n '2 s/am/was/p' sample.txt
-n → Suppresses automatic printing of lines
s/am/was/ → Substitutes “am” with “was”.
p → Prints only the modified lines, instead of displaying the whole file.
If "am" isn’t in line 2, nothing will be printed.
This command only affects line 2 other lines remain untouched.
If "am" appears on line 2, it will be replaced and printed.

Deleting Lines
Example 8: Deletes line 5 from the file.
sed '5d' sample.txt
5d → Deletes line 5 from sample.txt.
d → Stands for delete, removing the specified line.
Only line 5 is deleted.
The rest of the file remains unchanged.

Example 9: Deletes lines 3 to 6 from the file.
sed '3,6d' sample.txt
3,6d → Deletes lines 3 to 6 from sample.txt.
d → Stands for delete, removing the specified range of lines.
Lines 3 to 6 are deleted, while all other lines remain unchanged.
Since your file has exactly 6 lines, deleting lines 3 to 6 will leave only lines 1 and 2.

Viewing a Range of Lines
Example 10: Displays only lines 2 to 5 from the file.
sed -n '2,5p' sample.txt
Only lines 2 to 5 are printed.
The -n option ensures that only selected lines appear in the output.
This command does not modify the original file just displays the chosen lines.

Example 11: sed Command with Output Redirection
sed 's/unix/linux/' sample.txt >> finalsample.txt
Explanation:
sed 's/unix/linux/' sample.txt → Replaces the first occurrence of "unix" with "linux" in each line of sample.txt.
>> finalsample.txt → Appends the modified output to finalsample.txt instead of displaying it on the terminal.

Key Considerations:
This command does NOT modify sample.txt directly instead, it writes the changes to finalsample.txt.
If finalsample.txt already exists, the output is added to the end of the file.
If finalsample.txt does not exist, it is created.





5. find Command (Search Files & Directories)

The find command in Linux is used to search files and directories based on various conditions such as 
name, size, type, permission, modified time, etc.

Basic Syntax
find [starting-path] [options] [expression]

starting-path: Where to begin the search (. means current directory, / means root).

options: Flags like -type, -name, -size, etc.

expression: The pattern or condition to search.

1. Find empty files in home directory

Lists all empty files in your home directory and subdirectories.

find ~ -type f -empty

find → Searches for files and directories.

~ → Specifies the home directory (/home/ec2-user).

-type f → Limits the search to files only (excluding directories).

-empty → Finds empty files (files with zero bytes).

2. Find all empty files in the current directory

When you were in ~ (your home directory):

find . -type f -empty

This looked from your home directory and below, and found:

This includes empty files in all subdirectories (.cache/, logs/, etc.)

Then you changed directory: cd devops123/

Now . refers to the devops123/ folder, so when you run:

find . -type f -empty

It only checks inside devops123, and the output is:

Lists all empty files in the current directory and subdirectories.

file.txt was just created and has no content — it's completely empty.

So find is correctly identifying and listing that file.

So the result changes based on your current directory.

Tip: Always check where you are (pwd) before using find . to understand the search scope.

Understanding find with ~ vs .
find ~ -type f -empty

~ refers to your home directory (e.g., /home/ec2-user).

This command searches for all empty files anywhere inside your home directory no matter where you are in the terminal.

Use this when you want to scan your whole home directory from anywhere.

find . -type f -empty

. refers to your current directory (where you're standing right now).

This command searches for empty files only within the current directory and all its subdirectories.

Use this when you only want to search from your current location.

Use ~ when you want a complete scan of your space.
Use . when you want a focused search within a specific project or directory.

3. Find all empty files in /tmp

Lists all empty files within /tmp.

find /tmp -type f -empty

find → Searches for files and directories.

/tmp → Specifies the temporary directory as the search location.

-type f → Limits the search to files only (excluding directories).

-empty → Finds empty files (files with zero bytes).

4. Search for a directory by name
find ~ -type d -name linux

-type d → search directories only

~ → Specifies the home directory as the search location.

-type d → Limits the search to directories only (excluding files).

-name linux → Looks for a directory exactly named linux (case-sensitive).

5. Find files with 777 permissions
find ~ -type f -perm 0777
find . -type f -perm 0777

Searches for files (-type f) in the home directory (~).

Matches files with 777 permissions (-perm 0777).

Searches for files (-type f) in the current directory (.).

Matches files with 777 permissions (-perm 0777).

Helps in identifying risky files for security review.

6. Find all .txt files

Lists all .txt files in your home directory and subdirectories.

find ~ -type f -name "*.txt"

find → Searches for files and directories.

~ → Specifies the home directory as the search location.

-type f → Limits the search to files only (excluding directories).

-name "*.txt" → Finds all .txt files matching the pattern exactly.

7. Find File by Name Anywhere on the System
sudo find / -type f -name "file.txt"
What It Does:

sudo → Runs the command with superuser privileges so it can access system-protected directories.

find / → Starts searching from the root directory / meaning it will look everywhere on the system.

-type f → Searches for regular files only.

-name "file.txt" → Searches for files with the exact name file.txt.
